---
layout: post
title:  "Why tink?"
date:   2020-07-23 16:30:00 -0700
categories: mechanics
author: steve_hacks
---
A common question the developers get is about what's known as
"tinking", where attacking an enemy with the wrong sword causes a
tink sound, but still does damage, unlike in the original game
where tinking indicates full immunity.

Newer players first running into this (either by playing the
current stable release, or by turning on the "tink mode" flag in
newer experimental versions) are surprised by this behavior. On
the other hand, more seasoned players are surprised that newer
versions are removing this functionality. To understand why, it
will help to give some historical development context.

## Logic

The randomizer employs logic to ensure a seed is completable.
This logic is mostly unaffected by the player's level, but there
are a few situations where we must guarantee that a player is
able to gain levels.  In particular, while it's often possible to
cross the poison swamp or walk through a gauntlet of shooting
statues without the proper defensive items (gas mask or barrier),
it may require a significant amount of initial HP. If the player
cannot damage any enemies and is therefore stuck at level 1, it
may make the seed impossible if this blocks progression.

The solution is to make sure that the logic knows exactly what
items are required to defeat a reachable enemy. Unfortunately,
early versions of the randomizer (before the upcoming 1.3
release) did not have access to the enemy randomization during
item shuffle, since enemies were randomized after item placement.

Ideally we'd rearrange the randomization so that enemy shuffle
happens first. This was difficult because enemy shuffle is
intricately tied to the choice of pattern tables and palettes:
each location is allowed only two pattern tables and two color
palettes, making many enemy combinations impossible without
graphical glitches. The presence of a treasure chest in a
location restricts the pattern table selection slightly, but
mimics are much more restrictive (some may recall the glitchy
mimics that looked like jumping angry faces). Mimics therefore
needs to be decided before enemies are shuffled, since otherwise
most enemy choices will preclude mimic placement. Mimics were
originally placed during item shuffle, which makes our ideal fix
impossible.

## Original solution

A more tractable approach is to simply decouple the item
placement logic from the enemy randomization by ensuring that all
enemies can be killed with any sword. This changes the logic
requirements from needing a specific sword to kill an enemy to
instead allowing _any_ sword. Modifying the enemy damage routine
to ensure tinks still do a single damage conveniently circumvents
this problem, while retaining the same general "feel" of the
original game.

This quickly led to an ineresting "hard mode" flag: matching
sword not guaranteed. Some skilled players enjoyed the challenge
of the logic requiring the player to possibly have to tink bosses
at 1 damage per hit, which wouldn't have been possible with the
game's original programming.

## New version

In more recent versions, we've normalized on a pattern where
affordances (primarily glitches) are either logically required,
or else they're disabled and removed from the game entirely.
Tinks are similar and it made sense to give them the same
treatment. The key change that made this possible was to realize
that mimics can be shuffled separately from item placement, in a
significantly earlier step in the process. By simplifying the
item randomization flags to simply (1) whether mimics are
shuffled at all, and (2) whether unique items are shuffled with
non-unique items, we were able to finally make this separation
and thus move enemy shuffle to before item placement.

As of the upcoming version 1.3, tinking no longer does any
damage, just like in the original game. This more closely matches
the original game's mechanics and feel, and should increase
challenge slightly. For players who want to challenge themselves
with the possibility of tink fights, the option has been left in
as an optional hard mode flag, but now enabling the old tink mode
means that it may be logically required (i.e. Mado 2 might be
weak to water, but be holding the Sword of Water). We hope this
change proves enjoyable.
